What is your advice in this moment for President Trump? Well ah, President is a public servant. They are temporary occupants of the office by design. And when your time is up, uh, then it is your job, too. Put the country first and thinking beyond your own ego and your own interests and your own disappointments. My advice toe President Trump is if you want at this late stage in the game to be remembered as somebody who put country first, it's time for you to do the same thing in your view. It is time for him to concede. Absolutely. I Well, I mean, I think it was time for him to concede. Probably, uh, the day after the election, Uh, or at the latest two days after the election, when you look at the numbers objectively, uh, Joe Biden will have one handling. There is no scenario in which, um, any of those states would turn the other way and certainly not enough to reverse, uh, the outcome of the election. More than the courtesy of a concession, the Trump White House is declining to free up the usual funds and facilities for the incoming administration. President elect Biden is not receiving secret national security briefings as Mr Trump did when he was president elect. What, in your estimation, would our adversaries be thinking right now? Russia, China, about the fact that the transition is not moving forward. Well, look, I think our adversaries have seen us weakened not just as a council in this election, but over the last several years. We have these cleavages in the body politics that they're convinced they can exploit. There's the old adage that partisan politics should stop at the water's edge right that when it comes to our foreign policy that it is the United States of America, not the divided states of America. We met the former president at a symbol of America's past divisions. The Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery was Ah, hospital in the Civil War. Clara Barton and Walt Whitman cared for patients in the building where the 16th president consoled his wounded. We joined Mr Obama's peers in the gallery of the Presidents to talk about his book. I'm curious about the title. I think a lot of people feel that we are farther from a promised land. Well, I titled it The Promised Land because even though we may not get there in our lifetimes, even if we experienced hardships and disappointments along the way that I at least still have faith, we can, uh, create a more perfect union. Not a perfect union, but a more perfect union. You write in the book. Our democracy seems to be teetering on the brink of a crisis. What do you mean? We have gone through a presidency that disregarded ah, whole host of basic institutional norms, uh, expectations we have for a president that, uh, have been observed by Republicans and Democrats previously, Uh, and maybe most importantly on and most disconcertingly, what we've seen is what some people called truth decay, something that's been accelerated by outgoing President Trump. The sense that not only do we not have to tell the truth, but the truth doesn't even matter. What are these false claims of widespread election fraud doing to our country right now, the president doesn't like to lose and, uh, never admits loss. Um, I'm more troubled by the fact that other Republican officials who clearly know better are going along with this are humoring him in this fashion. Um, it is one more step in de legitimizing not just the incoming Biden administration, but democracy generally. And that's a dangerous path. We would never accept that out of our own kids behaving that way if they lost I I mean, if my daughters in any kind of competition, uh, powdered and then accused the other side of cheating when they lost when there was no evidence of it, we'd scold him. You know, I think that there has been this sense over the last several years that literally anything goes and is justified in order to get power on. Uh, that's not unique to the United States. They're strong men and dictators around the world who think that I could do anything to stay in power. I can kill people. I can throw them in jail. I can run phony elections. I can suppress journalists. Um, but that's not who we're supposed to be. And one of the signals, I think that, uh, Joe Biden needs to send to the world is that no, those values that we preached and we believed in and subscribed in, uh, we still believe President elect Biden one in this election, more votes than anyone in history. And yet the 2020 vote wasn't a repudiation of Donald Trump. It was more like an affirmation. He received 71 million votes, eight million mawr than he did in 2016. What does that tell you about our country today? Well, a. It tells us that were very divided, and as I said, it's not just the politicians. Now the voters are divided. Um, it has now become a contest where issues fax policies per se don't matter. Uh, as much as identity and wanting toe beat the other guy, Uh, you know, that's taken priority. I do think the current media environment adds to that greatly. This democracy doesn't work if we don't have an informed citizenry. This democracy doesn't work. If we don't have responsible elected officials at other levels who are willing to call the president when he's not doing something right, call him on it. It seems, though, Mr President, that Americans have gone from disagreeing with one another to hating one another, a problem that this man had, you know, And I wonder, he's a he's a good example of of somebody who who I think understood deeply the need Teoh be able to see, uh, another person's point of view. How do we overcome where we are today? There's no American figure that I admire any more than Abraham Lincoln, but he did end up with a civil war on his hands, and we'd like to avoid that. Uh, I do think that a new president consider new tone that's not going to solve all the gridlock in Washington. I think we're gonna have toe work, um, with the media and with the tech companies toe find ways Thio inform the public better about the issues and, uh, bolster the standards that in short, weaken separate truth from fiction. I think that we have to work at a local level when you start getting the local level. Mayors, uh, county commissioners, etcetera. They've actually got to make real decisions. It's not abstractions. It's like way need to fix this road. We need toe, get this snowplow out. We need toe. Make sure our kids, uh, have ah safe playground toe play in And, uh, at that level, I don't think people have that kind of visceral hatred. And that's where we have to start in terms of rebuilding the social trust we need for democracy to work. President, Mr Obama is speaking. After four years of virtual silence on Donald Trump, he followed a traditional commandment largely observed since Adam's succeeded Washington, thou shall not criticize your successor in a promised land. He wonders if that was a mist ake in your book, you ask quote whether I was too tempered in speaking the truth Too cautious in word or deed. Many Americans, Mr President, believe you were too cautious, too tempered. Yeah, and I think that's ah legitimate and understandable, uh, criticism At the end of the day, I consistently tried to treat my political opposition, uh, in the ways I'd want to be treated to not overreact. When, for example, uh, somebody yells, You lie in the middle of me giving a joint congressional address. It's not, too. I understand why there were times where my supporters wanted me to be more pugilistic. Thio pop folks, uh, in the head on Duke it out a little bit more. Was it a mistake that you didn't? Every president brings a certain temperament toe office. I think part of the reason I got elected was because I sent a message that, fundamentally, I believe the American people are good and decent and that, um, politics doesn't have to be some cage match in which everybody is going at each other's throats. On that, we can agree without being disagreeable. There have been worse presidential transitions than 2020. The Southern states seceded while Lincoln was president elect. Still, we couldn't help but notice outside the National Portrait Gallery businesses, air still boarded up against the fear of political violence. What should President Trump do on this next inauguration day? Look, there are a set of traditions that we have followed in the peaceful transfer of power, the outgoing president congratulates. The incoming president instructs the government and the agencies to cooperate with the new government Coming in, you invite the president elect to the Oval Office, how are you? And then on Inauguration Day, the president invites the president elect to the White House. There's a small reception, and then you drive to the inauguration site and the outgoing president sits. There is part of the audience as the new president is sworn in, and at that point the outgoing president is a citizen like everybody else and owes the new president the chance to do their best on behalf of the American people. Whether, uh, Donald Trump will do the same thing we'll have to see. So far, that's not been his approach. Um, but you know, uh, hope springs eternal. There's a promised land out there somewhere. Two hours after Mr Obama said that President Trump tweeted from the White House, we will win, even though no state is reporting fraud or errors that could change the outcome. We'll be back with Barack Obama on other crises in our country and one in his own home during Barack Obama's first inauguration in 2009. Unknown to the public, there was intelligence that a terrorist attack was planned. President Obama had at the podium instructions he would read to the crowd, should there be an evacuation of nearly two million people from the National Mall. This is one of the insights in Mr Obama's new book, A Promised Land. Ah, memoir of his early years, his historic election and his first term. We spoke to the 44th president about battles past and present. The story will continue in a moment. Did you watch the video of George Floyd strangulation? Of course it was heartbreaking. Um, very rarely, though, Did you see it so viscerally? And over a stretch of time where the humanity of the victim is so apparent, the pain and the the vulnerability of someone so clear. And it was, I think, a moment in which America, for a brief moment, came face to face with, uh, a reality that African Americans in this country, I think, had understood for quite some time, and I was heartened and inspired Bye. The galvanizing effect that it had on the country as a whole. The fact that it wasn't just black people, it wasn't just so quote unquote liberals who were appalled by it reacted to it and eventually marched. But it was everybody. And it was, uh, a small first step in the kind of reckoning with our past and our present that so often we avoid. But Mr President Trayvon Martin Tamir Rice. Briana Taylor, Right, George Floyd. Why is this injustice never overcome? Well, it for a couple of reasons. One is that we have a criminal justice system in which we ask oftentimes very young, oftentimes not very well trained officers to go into communities and just keep a lid on things. And, you know, we don't try toe get at some of the underlying causes for chronic poverty. So if we're going to actually solve this problem, there's some specific things we can do. Toe. Make sure that our contracts with police officers mhm don't completely insulate them when they do something wrong. Putting money into budgets for training these police officers more effectively teaching police officers not to escalate, but to de escalate. But it's important for us, not toe let ourselves off the hook and think this is just a police problem because those shootings, that devaluation of life is part and parcel with, ah, legacy of discrimination and Jim Crow and segregation that we're all responsible for. And if we're gonna actually put an end to racial bias in the criminal justice system, then we're gonna have to work on doing something about racial bias in corporate America and bias and where people can buy homes. And that is a larger project in which all of the good news is all of us can take some responsibility. We we can all do better on this front. Then we've been doing Scott. How are you? Elbow bump? I'm well, Mr President. We joined the president this past Wednesday behind masks and then kept our distance as three US counted 143,000 known covert infections that day a new record. Mr. Obama had also faced a now outbreak in his first term, a new flu H one n one. I was terrified of it and very quickly mobilized a team to figure out how are we going to take the best possible approach. And from the start I had some very clear criteria, which was number one. We're gonna follow the science. And the second thing was, let's make sure we're providing good information the American people. But H one N one was not as contagious. Nora's Lethal is co bid. It ultimately killed 12,000 Americans. Other battles in his book include the Financial Crisis Passing the Affordable Care Act, The Decision to Kill Osama bin Laden and leaving eight Years of work in the hands of another. You begin the book by writing about the day that you left Washington quote to someone diametrically opposed to everything we stood for. That may be the one thing that Donald Trump and I agree on is that he doesn't agree with me on anything. I don't see him as the cause for our divisions and the problems with our government. I think he's an accelerant, but they proceeded him and sadly, are going toe likely outlast him. You write in the book that Republicans had a battle plan to quote, refused to work with May, regardless of the circumstances, the issue or the consequences for the country. Now the same might be said of Democrats in a Republican administration. I wonder if today you think that Democrats and Republicans are no longer capable of compromise. First of all, I don't think this is, uh, just a plague on both their houses here. So the Democrats opposed George Bush on a whole bunch of stuff. But Ted Kennedy worked with George Bush to pass of prescription drug plan for seniors. Nancy Pelosi, who adamantly opposed the war in Iraq time and again, voted even when her base was angry about it to make sure that our troops were funded once the decision to send in troops to Iraq went in. Mr Obama blames gridlock on something old and something new. The Senate's filibuster tradition, which allows whatever party is in the minority to block legislation and non traditional media. The media landscape has changed, and as a consequence, voters perceptions have changed so that I think Democratic and Republican voters have become much more partisan. I would often hear this from Republicans during my presidency. Some of these folks have been colleagues of mine. I served in the Senate, Some of them were friends of mine, and they would confess to me I said, Look, Mr President, No, you're right. But If I vote with you on this, I'm going to get killed. I'll lose my seat because what had happened is there. Voter base had soaked in so much information that was demonizing me, demonizing the affordable care act that it becomes very difficult even for folks who want to cooperate to cooperate. And that's why I am somebody who does not blame the current partisanship solely on Donald Trump or solely on social media. You already saw some of these trends taking place early in my presidency, but I do think they've kept on getting worse. The former president also writes about his unlikely rise, including the obstacles at home. You're surprisingly honest in the book about your wife's opposition for you running for president in 2000 and eight. You quote her is saying the answer is no, I do not want you running for president. God, Barack, when is it going to be enough? Did I get the tone right? It was a little sharper in that, but it was pretty good school. And then she walks out of the room. Why did that not stop you? Look, it's a legitimate question. Keep in mind the context here. We had just two years earlier. I had run for the U. S. Senate in an unlikely race. Two years before that, I had run for Congress. Race you lost and the race I lost a couple of years before that, I'd run for the state Senate. We've got two young kids, Michelle still working. And I ask myself in the book, You know how much of this is just megalomania? How much of this is vanity? How much of this is me trying toe prove something to myself? And over time, she made a conclusion that I shouldn't stand in the way of this. Um, she did. She should not stand in the way of your ambitions to be president. Yeah, and she did so grudgingly. Um, and the fact that I ended up winning didn't necessarily alleviate her frustration because the toll it takes on families Israel, I think it's only after you emerge from an all consuming job that you realize that everything you hold dear is thanks to the one you love. I think I actually realized that even while I was in the job, um, the fact that she put up with it and forgave me was anak tive of grace that I am grateful for on I'm not sure I deserved the goal here. Scott Today, at age 59 Mr Obama is working on his presidential center. So this is gonna be on the South Side of Chicago and historic Jackson Park. And it's It's the place where Michelle and I met where I first started in public life. His team brought this model to show us Mr Obama's foundation has raised from private donations. Ah, little over half the estimated $500 million cost. It'll take about four years. Once they start, its's gonna be a place where, you know, we have the standard model Oval Office and Michelle's dresses, which will be very popular, no doubt. But also, you know, a whole host of facilities that allow us toe, provide classroom training, thio young people who are interested in public service and, you know, to beautify a park that conserve Ah, whole bunch of young people who have been under served in the past. In his last moments in the Oval Office, Mr Obama left a note in the president's desk for his successor. It read in part, We are just temporary occupants of this office. It's up to us to leave the instruments of our democracy at least a strong as we found them on that last day. The emotions really focus on the team that you've been working on, and it's very rare outside of maybe wartime, where you get a collection of people working together in a sustained way under that kind of pressure and stress. And so there's a melancholy to it. There was also, though, and I write about this a satisfaction in knowing that I had finished the job. I had run my stretch of the race and I could say unequivocally, despite regrets and disappointments about some things not getting done. Um, the country was better off when I left them when I when I got there.